            THE BASICS
                 OF THE
ELLIOTT WAVE PRINCIPLE


         by Robert R. Prechter, Jr.




                 Published by
          NEW CLASSICS LIBRARY
                  a division of




Post Office Box 1618, Gainesville, GA 30503 USA
800-336-1618 or 770-536-0309 or fax 770-536-2514
                     THE BASICS
                         OF THE
          ELLIOTT WAVE PRINCIPLE


                 Copyright © 1995-2004
                by Robert R. Prechter, Jr.


        Printed in the United States of America


               First Edition: August 1995
             Second Edition: February 1996
               Third Edition: April 2000
               Fourth Edition: June 2004
                      August 2007


         For information, address the publishers:
                 New Classics Library
                        a division of
                Elliott Wave International
                   Post Office Box 1618
             Gainesville, Georgia 30503 USA



All rights reserved. The material in this volume may not be
    reprinted or reproduced in any manner whatsoever.
Violators will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.


                  Cover design: Marc Benejan
                 Production: Pamela Greenwood



                   ISBN: 0-932750-63-X
                   CONTENTS

 7   The Basics
 7      The Five Wave Pattern
 8      Wave Mode
10      The Essential Design
11      Variations on the Basic Theme
12      Wave Degree

14   Motive Waves
14      Impulse
16         Extension
17         Truncation
18      Diagonal Triangles (Wedges)

19   Corrective Waves
19      Zigzags (5-3-5)
21      Flats (3-3-5)
22      Horizontal Triangles (Triangles)
24      Combinations (Double and Triple Threes)

26   Guidelines of Wave Formation
26      Alternation
26      Depth of Corrective Waves
27      Channeling Technique
28      Volume
29      Learning the Basics

32   The Fibonacci Sequence and its Application
35      Ratio Analysis
35         Retracements
36         Motive Wave Multiples
37         Corrective Wave Multiples

40   Perspective

41   Glossary
                      FOREWORD

     By understanding the Wave Principle, you can antici-
pate large and small shifts in the psychology driving any
investment market and help yourself minimize the emo-
tions that drive your own investment decisions. Where did
this valuable tool come from?
     Ralph Nelson Elliott, a corporate accountant by pro-
fession, studied price movements in the financial markets
and observed that certain patterns repeat themselves. He
offered proof of his discovery by making astonishingly ac-
curate stock market forecasts. What appears random and
unrelated, Elliott said, will actually trace out a recogniz-
able pattern once you learn what to look for. Elliott called
his discovery “the Wave Principle,” and its implications
were huge. He had identified the common link that drives
the trends in human affairs, from financial markets to fash-
ion, from politics to popular culture.
     Robert Prechter resurrected the Wave Principle from
near obscurity in 1976. Bob was working as an analyst for
Merrill Lynch when he discovered the complete body of
R.N. Elliott’s work in the New York Public Library.
     Mr. Prechter and A.J. Frost published Elliott Wave
Principle in 1978. The book received enthusiastic reviews
and became a Wall Street bestseller. Their forecast called
for a roaring bull market in the 1980s, to be followed by a
record bear market. Mr. Prechter left Merrill Lynch in 1979
to start the monthly publication, The Elliott Wave Theo-
rist, and a new focus for Wall Street and investors
worldwide was born.
     Knowledge of the Wave Principle among private and
professional investors grew dramatically in the 1980s. The
stunning accuracy of the forecasts in The Elliott Wave
Theorist earned numerous awards, and received a level of
recognition that no other such publication has ever
achieved.



                            -iv -
     It is no coincidence that the global acceptance of the
Elliott Wave Principle has paralleled the growth of Elliott
Wave International (EWI), the market analysis and pub-
lishing corporation founded by Robert R. Prechter, Jr. In
the two decades since then, EWI has earned the reputa-
tion as the world’s premier publisher of Elliott wave
analysis and investment commentary. Tens of thousands
of investors use the Wave Principle to guide their finan-
cial decisions. Tens of thousands more have bought
products indirectly, through distributors and representa-
tives. Prechter and Frost’s book has now been translated
into French, German, Dutch, Spanish, Swedish, Polish,
Japanese, Chinese, and Russian.
     Elliott Wave International is one of the world’s larg-
est providers of technical analysis. The revolution in
instant data transmission has given us a perfect vehicle
for around-the-clock coverage of global financial markets.
     We now provide institutional and private investors
with 24-hour market commentary via electronic delivery.
We also provide monthly publications, hotlines and
educational services that include periodic conferences,
intensive workshops and tutorials, video tapes, special
reports and books.




                            -v -
                ABOUT THE AUTHOR

     Founder and president of Elliott Wave International,
Robert Prechter has been publishing market commentary
since 1976. He began his career with the Merrill Lynch
Market Analysis Department in New York. In 1984, Bob
set a record in the options division of the U.S. Trading
Championship with a real-money trading account. In De-
cember 1989, Financial News Network (now CNBC) named
him “Guru of the Decade.” Bob served for nine years on
the Board of the Market Technicians Association and in
1990-1991 served as its president. During the 1990s, he
expanded his firm to provide analysis for institutions on
every major financial market in the world. Bob has writ-
ten 13 books on finance, most notably the two-volume set,
Socionomics – The Science of History and Social Predic-
tion. His recent title, Conquer the Crash — You Can Survive
and Prosper in a Deflationary Crash and Depression, was
a New York Times and Wall Street Journal business best-
seller. In 1999, Bob received the CSTA’s first annual A.J.
Frost Memorial Award for Outstanding Contribution to
the Development of Technical Analysis. In 2003, Traders
Library granted him its Hall of Fame award.




                           -vi -
                     THE BASICS

     “The Wave Principle” is Ralph Nelson Elliott’s discov-
ery that social, or crowd, behavior trends and reverses in
recognizable patterns. Using stock market data for the Dow
Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) as his main research tool,
Elliott discovered that the ever-changing path of stock mar-
ket prices reveals a structural design that in turn reflects
a basic harmony found in nature. From this discovery, he
developed a rational system of market analysis.
     Under the Wave Principle, every market decision is
both produced by meaningful information and produces
meaningful information. Each transaction, while at once
an effect, enters the fabric of the market and, by communi-
cating transactional data to investors, joins the chain of
causes of others’ behavior. This feedback loop is governed
by man’s social nature, and since he has such a nature,
the process generates forms. As the forms are repetitive,
they have predictive value.
     Elliott isolated thirteen “waves,” or patterns of direc-
tional movement, that recur in markets and are repetitive
in form, but are not necessarily repetitive in time or ampli-
tude. He named, defined and illustrated the patterns. He
then described how these structures link together to form
larger versions of the same patterns, how those in turn
are the building blocks for patterns of the next larger size,
and so on. His descriptions constitute a set of empirically
derived rules and guidelines for interpreting market ac-
tion. The patterns that naturally occur under the Wave
Principle are described below.

The Five-Wave Pattern
   In markets, progress ultimately takes the form of five
waves of a specific structure. Three of these waves, which
8                             The Basics of the Wave Principle




                          Figure 1

are labeled 1, 3 and 5, actually effect the directional move-
ment. They are separated by two countertrend interrup-
tions, which are labeled 2 and 4, as shown in Figure 1. The
two interruptions are apparently a requisite for overall
directional movement to occur.
     At any time, the market may be identified as being
somewhere in the basic five-wave pattern at the largest
degree of trend. Because the five-wave pattern is the over-
riding form of market progress, all other patterns are
subsumed by it.

Wave Mode
     There are two modes of wave development: motive and
corrective. Motive waves have a five-wave structure, while
corrective waves have a three-wave structure or a varia-
tion thereof. Motive mode is employed by both the five-wave
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   9




pattern of Figure 1 and its same-directional components,
i.e., waves 1, 3 and 5. Their structures are called “motive”
because they powerfully impel the market. Corrective mode
is employed by all countertrend interruptions, which in-
clude waves 2 and 4 in Figure 1. Their structures are called
“corrective” because they can accomplish only a partial
retracement, or “correction,” of the progress achieved by
any preceding motive wave. Thus, the two modes are fun-
damentally different, both in their roles and in their
construction, as will be detailed in an upcoming section.
      The five-wave motive phase has subwaves denoted by
numbers, and the three-wave corrective phase has sub-
waves are denoted by letters. Every motive wave is followed
by a corrective wave. Just as wave 2 corrects wave 1 in
Figure 1, the sequence A, B, C corrects the sequence 1, 2,
3, 4, 5 in Figure 2.




                          Figure 2
10                             The Basics of the Wave Principle




                            Figure 3


The Essential Design
      Figure 3 not only illustrates a larger version of Figure
2, it also illustrates Figure 2 itself, in greater detail. Waves
(1) and (2) in Figure 3, if examined under a “microscope,”
would take the same form as waves 1 and 2. Regardless
of degree, the form is constant. We can use Figure 3 to
illustrate two waves, eight waves or thirty-four waves, de-
pending upon the degree to which we are referring.
      Now observe that within the corrective pattern illus-
trated as wave 2 in Figure 3, waves (A) and (C), which
point downward, are each composed of five waves: 1, 2, 3,
4 and 5. Similarly, wave (B), which points upward, is com-
posed of three waves: A, B and C. This construction
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   11




discloses a crucial point: Motive waves do not always point
upward, and corrective waves do not always point down-
ward. The mode of a wave is determined not by its absolute
direction but primarily by its relative direction. Aside from
four specific exceptions, which will be discussed later in
this chapter, waves divide in motive mode (five waves) when
trending in the same direction as the wave of one larger
degree of which it is a part, and in corrective mode (three
waves or a variation) when trending in the opposite direc-
tion. Waves (A) and (C) are motive, trending in the same
direction as wave 2. Wave (B) is corrective because it cor-
rects wave (A) and is countertrend to wave 2. In summary,
the essential underlying tendency of the Wave Principle is
that action in the same direction as the one larger trend
develops in five waves, while reaction against the one larger
trend develops in three waves, at all degrees of trend.
     Nor does Figure 3 imply finality. As before, this larger
cycle automatically becomes two subdivisions of the wave
of next higher degree. As long as progress continues, the
process of building to greater degrees continues. The re-
verse process of subdividing into lesser degrees apparently
continues indefinitely as well. As far as we can determine,
then, all waves both have and are component waves.

Variations on the Basic Theme
     The Wave Principle would be simple to apply if the
basic theme described above were the complete descrip-
tion of market behavior. However, the real world,
fortunately or unfortunately, is not so simple. The rest of
this section fills out the description of how the market be-
haves in reality.
12                            The Basics of the Wave Principle



Wave Degree
    All waves may be categorized by relative size, or de-
gree. Elliott discerned nine degrees of waves, from the
smallest wiggle on an hourly chart to the largest wave he
could assume existed from the data then available. He
chose the names listed below to label these degrees, from
largest to smallest:
                    Grand Supercycle
                       Supercycle
                          Cycle
                        Primary
                      Intermediate
                         Minor
                         Minute
                        Minuette
                      Subminuette

     Cycle waves subdivide into Primary waves that sub-
divide into Intermediate waves that in turn subdivide into
Minor and sub-Minor waves. It is important to understand
that these labels refer to specifically identifiable degrees
of waves. By using this nomenclature, the analyst can iden-
tify precisely the position of a wave in the overall
progression of the market, much as longitude and latitude
are used to identify a geographical location. To say, “the
Dow Jones Industrial Average is in Minute wave 0 of
Minor wave 1 of Intermediate wave (3) of Primary wave
5 of Cycle wave I of Supercycle wave (V) of the current
Grand Supercycle” is to identify a specific point along the
progression of market history.
     When numbering and lettering waves, some scheme
such as the one shown at right is recommended to differen-
tiate the degrees of waves in the stock market’s progression.
We have standardized the labels as follows:
 Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                         13




Wave Degree                 5s With the Trend        3s Against the
                                                         Trend
                      (↑ next is Arabic symbols)      (↑ next is caps)
 Grand Supercycle          I &       *    ( )         a     b    c
 Supercycle                (I) (II) (III) (IV) (V)    (a) (b)    (c)
 Cycle                      I II III IV V              a   b      c
 Primary                   1 2       3    4 5          A    B    C
 Intermediate          (1) (2)      (3)   (4) (5)      (A) (B) (C)
 Minor                  1 2          3     4 5          A   B     C
 Minute                    6 7       8    9 0           a b c
 Minuette              (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v)         (a) (b) (c)
 Subminuette            i   ii    iii  iv v             a    b    c
                      (↓ next is Arabic symbols)      (↓ next is caps)
14                            The Basics of the Wave Principle



                    MOTIVE WAVES
      Motive waves subdivide into five waves and always move
in the same direction as the trend of one larger degree.
They are straightforward and relatively easy to recognize
and interpret.
      Within motive waves, wave 2 always retraces less than
100% of wave 1, and wave 4 always retraces less than 100%
of wave 3. Wave 3, moreover, always travels beyond the
end of wave 1. The goal of a motive wave is to make
progress, and these rules of formation assure that it will.
      Elliott further discovered that in price terms, wave 3
is often the longest and never the shortest among the three
actionary waves (1, 3 and 5) of a motive wave. As long as
wave 3 undergoes a greater percentage movement than
either wave 1 or 5, this rule is satisfied. It almost always
holds on an arithmetic basis as well. There are two types
of motive waves: impulse and diagonal triangle.

IMPULSE
     The most common motive wave is an impulse. In an
impulse, wave 4 does not enter the territory of (i.e., “over-
lap”) wave 1. This rule holds for all non-leveraged “cash”
markets. Futures markets, with their extreme leverage,
can induce short term price extremes that would not occur
in cash markets. Even so, overlapping is usually confined
to daily and intraday price fluctuations and even then is
rare. In addition, the actionary subwaves (1, 3 and 5) of an
impulse are themselves motive, and subwave 3 is specifi-
cally an impulse. Figures 2, 3 and 4 depict impulses in the
1, 3, 5, A and C wave positions.
     As detailed in the preceding three paragraphs, there
are only a few simple rules for interpreting impulses prop-
erly. A rule is so called because it governs all waves to
which it applies. Typical, yet not inevitable, characteris-
tics of waves are called guidelines. Guidelines of impulse
formation, including extension, truncation, alternation,
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                15




                          Figure 4

equality, channeling, personality and ratio relationships
are discussed below. A rule should never be disregarded.
In many years of practice with countless patterns, we have
found but one instance above Subminuette degree when
all other rules and guidelines combined to suggest that a
16                           The Basics of the Wave Principle



rule was broken. Analysts who routinely break any of the
rules detailed in this section are practicing some form of
analysis other than that guided by the Wave Principle.
These rules have great practical utility in correct count-
ing, which we will explore further in discussing extensions.

Extension
     Most impulses contain what Elliott called an exten-
sion. Extensions are elongated impulses with exaggerated
subdivisions. The vast majority of impulse waves do con-
tain an extension in one and only one of their three motive
subwaves (1, 3 or 5). The diagrams in Figure 4, illustrat-
ing extensions, will clarify this point.
     Often the third wave of an extended third wave is an
extension, producing a profile such as shown in Figure 5.




                          Figure 5
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                  17




Truncation
     Elliott used the word “failure” to describe a situation
in which the fifth wave does not move beyond the end of
the third. We prefer the less connotative term, “trunca-
tion,” or “truncated fifth.” A truncation can usually be
verified by noting that the presumed fifth wave contains
the necessary five subwaves, as illustrated in Figures 6
and 7. Truncation often occurs following a particularly
strong third wave.
     Truncation gives warning of underlying weakness or
strength in the market. In application, a truncated fifth
wave will often cut short an expected target. This annoy-
ance is counterbalanced by its clear implications for
persistence in the new direction of trend.




                          Figure 6




                          Figure 7
18                           The Basics of the Wave Principle



DIAGONAL TRIANGLES (WEDGES)
     A diagonal triangle is a special type of wave that oc-
curs primarily in the fifth wave position at times when the
preceding move has gone “too
far too fast,” as Elliott put it. A
diagonal triangle is a motive
pattern, yet not an impulse, as
it has one or two corrective
characteristics. Diagonal tri-
angles substitute for impulses
at specific locations in the wave
structure. They are the only
five-wave structures in the di-
rection of the main trend
within which wave four almost
always moves into the price ter-
ritory of (i.e., overlaps) wave
one. (See Figure 8.)
                                           Figure 8
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                    19




                  CORRECTIVE WAVES

     Markets move against the trend of one greater degree
only with a seeming struggle. Resistance from the larger
trend appears to prevent a correction from developing a
full motive structure. The struggle between the two oppo-
sitely trending degrees generally makes corrective waves
less clearly identifiable than motive waves, which always
flow with comparative ease in the direction of the one larger
trend. As another result of the conflict between trends, cor-
rective waves are quite a bit more varied than motive waves.
     Corrective patterns fall into four main categories:
     Zigzag (5-3-5; includes three types: single, double, and
triple);
     Flat (3-3-5; includes three types: regular, expanded,
and running);
     Triangle (3-3-3-3-3; four types: three of the contract-
ing variety (ascending, descending, and symmetrical) and
one of the expanding variety (reverse symmetrical);
     Combination (two types: double three and triple three).


ZIGZAGS (5-3-5)
     A single zigzag in a bull market is a simple three-wave
declining pattern labeled A-B-C and subdividing 5-3-5. The
top of wave B is noticeably lower than the start of wave A,
as illustrated in Figures 9 and 10.
     Occasionally zigzags will occur twice, or at most, three
times in succession, particularly when the first zigzag falls
short of a normal target. In these cases, each zigzag is sepa-
rated by an intervening “three” (labeled X), producing what
is called a double zigzag (see Figure 11) or triple zigzag.
The zigzags are labeled W and Y (and Z, if a triple).
20                  The Basics of the Wave Principle




     Figure 9                   Figure 10




                Figure 11
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   21




            Figure 12                       Figure 13


FLATS (3-3-5)
     A flat correction differs from a zigzag in that the sub-
wave sequence is 3-3-5, as shown in Figures 12 and 13.
Since wave A lacks sufficient downward force to unfold
into a full five waves as it does in a zigzag, the B wave
reaction seems to inherit this lack of countertrend pres-
sure and terminates near the start of wave A. Wave C, in
turn, generally terminates just slightly beyond the end of
wave A rather than significantly beyond as in zigzags.
     Flat corrections usually retrace less of preceding im-
pulse waves than do zigzags. They participate in periods
involving a strong larger trend and thus virtually always




             Figure 14                      Figure 15
22                            The Basics of the Wave Principle



precede or follow extensions. The more powerful the un-
derlying trend, the briefer the flat tends to be. Within
impulses, fourth waves frequently sport flats, while second
waves rarely do.
     Three types of 3-3-5 corrections have been identified
by differences in their overall shape. In a regular flat
correction, wave B terminates about at the level of the
beginning of wave A, and wave C terminates a slight bit
past the end of wave A, as we have shown in Figures 12
and 13. Far more common, however, is the variety called
an expanded flat, which contains a price extreme beyond
that of the preceding impulse wave. In expanded flats, wave
B of the 3-3-5 pattern terminates beyond the starting level
of wave A, and wave C ends more substantially beyond
the ending level of wave A, as shown in Figures 14 and 15.
     In a rare variation on the 3-3-5 pattern, which we call
a running flat, wave B terminates well beyond the begin-
ning of wave A as in an expanded flat, but wave C fails to
travel its full distance, falling short of the level at which
wave A ended. There are hardly any examples of this type
of correction in the price record.

HORIZONTAL TRIANGLES (TRIANGLES)
     Triangles are overlapping five wave affairs that sub-
divide 3-3-3-3-3. They appear to reflect a balance of forces,
causing a sideways movement that is usually associated
with decreasing volume and volatility. Triangles fall into
four main categories as illustrated in Figure 16. These il-
lustrations depict the first three types as taking place
within the area of preceding price action, in what may be
termed regular triangles. However, it is quite common,
particularly in contracting triangles, for wave b to exceed
the start of wave a in what may be termed a running tri-
angle, as shown in Figure 17.
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.               23




                          Figure 16
24                            The Basics of the Wave Principle




                          Figure 17

     Although upon extremely rare occasions a second wave
in an impulse appears to take the form of a triangle, tri-
angles nearly always occur in positions prior to the final
actionary wave in the pattern of one larger degree, i.e., as
wave four in an impulse, wave B in an A-B-C, or the final
wave X in a double or triple zigzag or combination (see
next section).

COMBINATIONS (DOUBLE AND TRIPLE THREES)
     Elliott called sideways combinations of corrective pat-
terns “double threes” and “triple threes.” While a single
three is any zigzag or flat, a triangle is an allowable final
component of such combinations and in this context is
called a “three.” A double or triple three, then, is a combi-
nation of simpler types of corrections, including the various
types of zigzags, flats and triangles. Their occurrence ap-
pears to be the flat correction’s way of extending sideways
action. As with double and triple zigzags, each simple cor-
rective pattern is labeled W, Y and Z. The reactionary
waves, labeled X, can take the shape of any corrective pat-
tern but are most commonly zigzags. Figures 18 and 19
show two examples of double threes.
     For the most part, double threes and triple threes are
horizontal in character. One reason for this trait is that
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                  25




                          Figure 18




                          Figure 19


there is never more than one zigzag in a combination. Nei-
ther is there more than one triangle. Recall that triangles
occurring alone precede the final movement of a larger
trend. Combinations appear to recognize this character and
sport triangles only as the final wave in a double or triple
three.
     All the patterns illustrated in this booklet take the
same form whether within a larger rising or falling trend.
In a falling trend, they are simply inverted.
26                             The Basics of the Wave Principle



     GUIDELINES OF WAVE FORMATION

ALTERNATION
     The guideline of alternation states that if wave two of
an impulse is a sharp retracement, expect wave four to be
a sideways correction, and vice versa. Figure 20 shows the
most characteristic breakdowns of impulse waves, both up
and down. Sharp corrections never include a new price ex-
treme, i.e., one that lies beyond the orthodox end of the
preceding impulse wave. They are almost always zigzags
(single, double or triple); occasionally they are double threes
that begin with a zigzag. Sideways corrections include flats,
triangles, and double and triple corrections. They usually
include a new price extreme, i.e., one that lies beyond the
orthodox end of the preceding impulse wave.




                           Figure 20


DEPTH OF CORRECTIVE WAVES
    No market approach other than the Wave Principle
gives as satisfactory an answer to the question, “How far
down can a bear market be expected to go?” The primary
guideline is that corrections, especially when they them-
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                  27




selves are fourth waves, tend to register their maximum
retracement within the span of travel of the previous fourth
wave of one lesser degree, most commonly near the level of
its terminus. Note in Figure 21, for instance, how wave 2
ends at the level of wave four of 1, and how wave 4 ends at
the level of wave four of 3.




                          Figure 21

CHANNELING TECHNIQUE
     Elliott noted that parallel trend channels typically
mark the upper and lower boundaries of impulse waves,
often with dramatic precision. Analysts should draw them
in advance to assist in determining wave targets and to
provide clues to the future development of trends.
28                            The Basics of the Wave Principle



     To draw a proper channel, first connect the ends of
waves two and four. If waves one and three are normal,
the upper parallel most accurately forecasts the end of wave
5 when drawn touching the peak of wave three, as in Fig-
ure 21. If wave three is abnormally strong, almost vertical,
then a parallel drawn from its top may be too high. Expe-
rience has shown that a parallel to the baseline that
touches the top of wave one is then more useful.
     The question of whether to expect a parallel channel
on arithmetic or semilog (percentage) scale is still unre-
solved as far as developing a definite tenet on the subject.
If the price development at any point does not fall neatly
within two parallel lines on the scale (either arithmetic or
semilog) you are using, switch to the other scale in order
to observe the channel in correct perspective. To stay on
top of all developments, the analyst should always use both.
     Within parallel channels and the converging lines of
diagonal triangles, if a fifth wave approaches its upper
trendline on declining volume, it is an indication that the
end of the wave will meet or fall short of it. If volume is
heavy as the fifth wave approaches its upper trendline, it
indicates a possible penetration of the upper line, which
Elliott called “throw-over.” Throw-overs also occur, with
the same characteristics, in declining markets.

VOLUME
     In normal fifth waves below Primary degree, volume
tends to be less than in third waves. If volume in an ad-
vancing fifth wave of less than Primary degree is equal to
or greater than that in the third wave, an extension of the
fifth is in force. While this outcome is often to be expected
anyway if the first and third waves are about equal in
length, it is an excellent warning of those rare times when
both a third and a fifth wave are extended.
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                    29




     At Primary degree and greater, volume tends to be
higher in an advancing fifth wave merely because of the
natural long term growth in the number of participants in
bull markets.


LEARNING THE BASICS
     The Wave Principle is unparalleled in providing an
overall perspective on the position of the market most of
the time. While this perspective is extremely comforting
and useful, the more practical goal of any analytical method
is to identify market lows suitable for entering positions
on the long side and market highs offering the opportu-
nity to take profits or enter the short side. The Elliott Wave
Principle is especially well suited to these functions. Nev-
ertheless, the Wave Principle does not provide certainty
about any one market outcome. One must understand and
accept that any approach that can identify high odds for a
fairly specific outcome will produce a losing bet some of
the time.
     What the Wave Principle provides is an objective
means of assessing the relative probabilities of possible
future paths for the market. What’s more, competent ana-
lysts applying the rules and guidelines of the Wave Principle
objectively should usually agree on the order “of those prob-
abilities.” At any time, two or more valid wave
interpretations are usually acceptable by the rules of the
Wave Principle. The rules are highly specific and keep the
number of valid alternatives to a minimum. Among the
valid alternatives, the analyst will generally regard as pre-
ferred the interpretation that satisfies the largest number
of guidelines and will accord top alternate status to the
interpretation satisfying the next largest number of guide-
lines, and so on.
30                             The Basics of the Wave Principle



     Alternate interpretations are extremely important.
Your second-best “count” is an essential aspect of trading
with the Wave Principle, because in the event that the
market fails to follow the preferred scenario, your top al-
ternate count becomes your backup plan.
     The best approach is deductive reasoning. Knowing
what Elliott rules will not allow, one can deduce that what-
ever remains must be the most likely course for the market.
By applying all the rules of extensions, alternation, over-
lapping, channeling, volume and the rest, the analyst has
a much more formidable arsenal than one might imagine
at first glance.
     Most other approaches to market analysis, whether
fundamental, technical or cyclical, disallow other than ar-
bitrarily chosen stop points, thus keeping either risk or
frequency of stop-outs high. The Wave Principle, in con-
trast, provides a built-in objective method for placing a
loss-limiting stop. Since Elliott wave analysis is based upon
price patterns, a pattern identified as having been com-
pleted is either over or it isn’t. If the market changes
direction, the analyst has caught the turn. If the market
moves beyond what the apparently completed pattern al-
lows, the conclusion is wrong, and any funds at risk can be
reclaimed immediately.
     Of course, there are often times when, despite a rigor-
ous analysis, the question may arise as to how a developing
move is to be counted or perhaps classified as to degree.
When there is no clearly preferred interpretation, the ana-
lyst must wait until the count resolves itself, in other words,
to “sweep it under the rug until the air clears,” as Hamilton
Bolton suggested. Almost always, subsequent moves will
clarify the status of previous waves by revealing their po-
sition in the pattern of the next higher degree. When
subsequent waves clarify the picture, the probability that
a turning point is at hand can suddenly and excitingly rise
to nearly 100%.
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                    31




     The ability to identify junctures is remarkable enough,
but the Wave Principle is the only method of analysis which
also provides guidelines for forecasting. Many of these
guidelines are specific and can occasionally yield results
of stunning precision. If indeed markets are patterned, and
if those patterns have a recognizable geometry, then re-
gardless of the variations allowed, certain price and time
relationships are likely to recur. In fact, real world experi-
ence shows that they do. The next section addresses some
additional guidelines that are helpful in the forecasting
exercise.
32                             The Basics of the Wave Principle



          THE FIBONACCI SEQUENCE
            AND ITS APPLICATION

     Known for centuries by scientists, naturalists and
mathematicians, the sequence of numbers 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8,
13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, and so on to infinity is known today
as the Fibonacci sequence. The sum of any two adjacent
numbers in this sequence forms the next higher number
in the sequence, viz., 1 plus 1 equals 2, 1 plus 2 equals 3, 2
plus 3 equals 5, 3 plus 5 equals 8, and so on to infinity. The
ratio of any two consecutive numbers in the sequence ap-
proximates 1.618, or its inverse, .618, after the first several
numbers. Refer to Figure 22 for a complete ratio table in-
terlocking all Fibonacci numbers from 1 to 144.
     1.618 (or .618) is known as the Golden Ratio or Golden
Mean. Nature uses the Golden Ratio in its most intimate
building blocks and in its most advanced patterns, in forms
as minuscule as atomic structure and DNA molecules to
those as large as planetary orbits and galaxies. It is
involved in such diverse phenomena as quasi crystal
arrangements, planetary distances and periods, reflections
of light beams on glass, the brain and nervous system,
musical arrangement, and the structures of plants and
animals. Science is rapidly discovering that there is indeed
a basic proportional principle of nature. The stock market
has the very same mathematical base as do these natural
phenomena.
     At every degree of stock market activity, a bull mar-
ket subdivides into five waves and a bear market
subdivides into three waves, giving us the 5-3 relation-
ship that is the mathematical basis of the Elliott Wave
Principle. We can generate the complete Fibonacci se-
quence by using Elliott’s concept of the progression of the
market. If we start with the simplest expression of the con-
cept of a bear swing, we get one straight line decline. A
bull swing, in its simplest form, is one straight line advance.
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.               33




                          Figure 22
34                           The Basics of the Wave Principle




                         Figure 23



A complete cycle is two lines. In the next degree of com-
plexity, the corresponding numbers are 3, 5 and 8. As
illustrated in Figure 23, this sequence can be taken to in-
finity.
     In its broadest sense, then, the Elliott Wave Principle
proposes that the same law that shapes living creatures
and galaxies is inherent in the spirit and attitudes of men
en masse. The Elliott Wave Principle shows up clearly in
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   35




the market because the stock market is the finest reflector
of mass psychology in the world. It is a nearly perfect re-
cording of man’s social psychological states and trends,
reflecting the fluctuating valuation of his own productive
enterprise, and making manifest its very real patterns of
progress and regress. Whether our readers accept or reject
this proposition makes no great difference, as the empirical
evidence is available for study and observation. Order in
life? Yes. Order in the stock market? Apparently.

RATIO ANALYSIS
     Ratio analysis has revealed a number of precise price
relationships that occur often among waves. There are two
categories of relationships: retracements and multiples.

Retracements
     Fairly often, a correction retraces a Fibonacci percent-
age of the preceding wave. As illustrated in Figure 24, sharp
corrections tend more often to retrace 61.8% or 50% of the
previous wave, particularly when they occur as wave 2 of
an impulse wave, wave B of a larger zigzag, or wave X in a
multiple zigzag. Sideways corrections tend more often to
retrace 38.2% of the previous impulse wave, particularly
when they occur as wave 4, as shown in Figure 25.




           Figure 24                     Figure 25
36                            The Basics of the Wave Principle



     Retracements are where most analysts place their fo-
cus. Far more reliable, however, are relationships between
alternate waves, or lengths unfolding in the same direc-
tion, as explained in the next section.

Motive Wave Multiples
     When wave 3 is extended, waves 1 and 5 tend towards
equality or a .618 relationship, as illustrated in Figure 26.
Actually, all three motive waves tend to be related by Fi-
bonacci mathematics, whether by equality, 1.618 or 2.618
(whose inverses are .618 and .382). These impulse wave
relationships usually occur in percentage terms. For in-
stance, wave I in the Dow Jones Industrials from 1932 to
1937 gained 371.6%, while wave III from 1942 to 1966
gained 971.7%, or 2.618 times as much.




     Figure 26           Figure 27              Figure 28
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   37




      Wave 5’s length is sometimes related by the Fibonacci
ratio to the length of wave 1 through wave 3, as illustrated
in Figure 27. In those rare cases when wave 1 is extended,
it is wave 2 that often subdivides the entire impulse wave
into the Golden Section, as shown in Figure 28.
      In a related observation, unless wave 1 is extended,
wave 4 often divides the price range of an impulse wave
into the Golden Section. In such cases, the latter portion is
.382 of the total distance when wave 5 is not extended, as
shown in Figure 29, and .618 when it is, as shown in
Figure 30. This guideline explains why a retracement fol-
lowing a fifth wave often has double resistance at the same
level: the end of the preceding fourth wave and the .382
retracement point.




         Figure 29                          Figure 30


Corrective Wave Multiples
     In a zigzag, the length of wave C is usually equal to
that of wave A, as shown in Figure 31, although it is not
uncommonly 1.618 or .618 times the length of wave A.
This same relationship applies to a second zigzag relative
to the first in a double zigzag pattern, as shown in Figure
32.
38                           The Basics of the Wave Principle




        Figure 31                        Figure 32

     In a regular flat correction, waves A, B and C are, of
course, approximately equal. In an expanded flat correc-
tion, wave C is usually 1.618 times the length of wave A.
Often wave C will terminate beyond the end of wave A by
.618 times the length of wave A. Each of these tendencies




                          Figure 33
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   39




are illustrated in Figure 33. In rare cases, wave C is 2.618
times the length of wave A. Wave B in an expanded flat is
sometimes 1.236 or 1.382 times the length of wave A.
      In a triangle, we have found that at least two of the
alternate waves are typically related to each other by .618.
I.e., in a contracting, ascending or descending triangle,
wave e = .618c, wave c = .618a, or wave d = .618b. In an
expanding triangle, the multiple is 1.618.
      In double and triple corrections, the net travel of one
simple pattern is sometimes related to another by equal-
ity or, particularly if one of the threes is a triangle, by
.618.
      Finally, wave 4 quite commonly spans a gross or net
price range that has an equality or Fibonacci relationship
to its corresponding wave 2. As with impulse waves, these
relationships usually occur in percentage terms.
      These guidelines increase dramatically in utility when
used together, as several are simultaneously applicable in
almost every situation at the various degrees of trend.
40                           The Basics of the Wave Principle



                   PERSPECTIVE

      What the Wave Principle says is that mankind’s
progress (of which the stock market is a popularly deter-
mined valuation) does not occur in a straight line, does
not occur randomly, and does not occur cyclically. Rather,
progress takes place in a “three steps forward, two steps
back” fashion, a form that nature prefers. As a corollary,
the Wave Principle reveals that periods of setback in fact
are a requisite for social (and perhaps even individual)
progress.
      Until a few years ago, the idea that market movements
are patterned was highly controversial, but recent scien-
tific discoveries have established that pattern formation
is a fundamental characteristic of complex systems, which
include financial markets. Some such systems undergo
“punctuated growth,” that is, periods of growth alternat-
ing with phases of non-growth or decline, building fractally
into similar patterns of increasing size. This is precisely
the type of pattern identified in market movements by R.N.
Elliott some sixty years ago.
      Most important to individuals, portfolio managers and
investment corporations is that the Wave Principle often
indicates in advance the relative magnitude of the next
period of market progress or regress. Living in harmony
with those trends can make the difference between suc-
cess and failure in financial affairs.
      To obtain a full understanding of the Wave Principle,
including the terms and patterns, please read Elliott Wave
Principle by A.J. Frost and Robert Prechter. We wish you
every success.
Robert R. Prechter, Jr.                                   41




                          GLOSSARY
Alternation (guideline of) - If wave two is a sharp cor-
rection, wave four will usually be a sideways correction,
and vice versa.
Apex - Intersection of the two boundary lines of a con-
tracting triangle.
Corrective Wave - A three-wave pattern, or combina-
tion of three-wave patterns, that moves in the opposite
direction of the trend of one larger degree.
Diagonal Triangle (Ending) - A wedge-shaped pattern
containing overlap that occurs only in fifth or C waves.
Subdivides 3-3-3-3-3.
Diagonal Triangle (Leading) - A wedge-shaped pat-
tern containing overlap that occurs only in first or A waves.
Subdivides 5-3-5-3-5.
Double Three - Combination of two simple sideways cor-
rective patterns, labeled W and Y, separated by a corrective
wave labeled X.
Double Zigzag - Combination of two zigzags, labeled W
and Y, separated by a corrective wave labeled X.
Equality (guideline of) - In a five-wave sequence, when
wave three is the longest, waves five and one tend to be
equal in price length.
Expanded Flat - Flat correction in which wave B enters
new price territory relative to the preceding impulse wave.
Failure - See Truncated Fifth.
Flat - Sideways correction labeled A-B-C. Subdivides 3-
3-5.
Impulse Wave - A five-wave pattern that subdivides 5-
3-5-3-5 and contains no overlap.
Motive Wave - A five-wave pattern that makes progress,
i.e., any impulse or diagonal triangle.
Irregular Flat - See Expanded Flat.
42                          The Basics of the Wave Principle



One-two, one-two - The initial development in a five-
wave pattern, just prior to acceleration at the center of
wave three.
Overlap - The entrance by wave four into the price ter-
ritory of wave one. Not permitted in impulse waves.
Previous Fourth Wave - The fourth wave within the
preceding impulse wave of the same degree. Corrective
patterns typically terminate in this area.
Sharp Correction - Any corrective pattern that does
not contain a price extreme meeting or exceeding that of
the ending level of the prior impulse wave; alternates
with sideways correction.
Sideways Correction - Any corrective pattern that con-
tains a price extreme meeting or exceeding that of the
prior impulse wave; alternates with sharp correction.
Third of a Third - Powerful middle section within an
impulse wave.
Thrust - Motive wave following completion of a triangle.
Triangle (contracting, ascending or descending) -
Corrective pattern, subdividing 3-3-3-3-3 and labeled A-
B-C-D-E. Occurs as a fourth, B, X or Y wave. Trendlines
converge as pattern progresses.
Triangle (expanding) - Same as other triangles but
trendlines diverge as pattern progresses.
Triple Three - Combination of three simple sideways
corrective patterns labeled W, Y and Z, each separated by
a corrective wave labeled X.
Triple Zigzag - Combination of three zigzags, labeled
W, Y and Z, each separated by a corrective wave labeled
X.
Truncated Fifth - The fifth wave in an motive pattern
that fails to exceed the price extreme of the third wave.
Zigzag - Sharp correction, labeled A-B-C. Subdivides 5-
3-5.
Elliott Wave Educational Video Series


                                           “the finest
                                               Elliott wave material
                                             ever produced”
                                                             – Commodity Traders Consumer Report



                                            The Elliott Wave Educational Video Series is
                                            the most valuable, most comprehensive Wave
                                            Principle instruction available to date.

                                    Hailed as “the finest Elliott wave material
                                    ever produced” by the Commodity Traders
 Consumer Report, these 10 discs will teach you principles every Elliott wave
 practitioner should know, in an easy-to-grasp format.

 The 10-volume series, recorded over 15 years ago, continues to be among our
 most popular products.

 The DVDs feature a new introduction from Bob Prechter and convenient, user-
 friendly chapter selection menus to help you find what you need quickly– no
 searching, no fast-forwarding. The new DVD format truly transforms this classic
 series into the ultimate Wave Principle reference tool.




                     10-volume set - $1199
                            Order now at:
                 www.elliottwave.com/wave/DVDbasics
          Or, call customer service at 800-336-1618 or 770-536-0309 (from outside the U.S.)
                                      Please mention code: BASICS.


 We Guarantee Your Satisfaction.To ensure you’re satisfied with your Elliott Wave DVD(s),
 we offer this guarantee: When you receive your DVD(s), you may unwrap and view any one DVD. If
 you decide the DVD(s) are not for you, simply return them within 30 days. We’ll give you a cheerful,
 100% refund of the purchase price (minus S&H).
            Now Available on DVD

 The ultimate Wave Principle reference tool includes:
 Volume 1. Introduction to the           Volume 6. Understanding the
 Elliott Wave Principle. A clear,        Fibonacci Ratio in Financial
 step-by-step explanation of how the     Markets. You'll grasp how to apply
 psychological forces within markets     the Fibonacci sequence to market
 construct the basic Elliott patterns.   analysis, and see that Elliott's
 Bonus Feature: A Special Introduction   description of market behavior
 from Bob Prechter. 140 min. $129        anticipated Mandelbrot's concept of
                                         fractal geometry in natural structures.
 Volume 2. Counting Waves                71 min. $129
 Correctly. How to apply the Wave
 Principle to every market, from         Volume 7. Calculating Fibonacci
 stocks to cocoa - and how to apply      Ratios with the Precision Ratio
 the three Elliott rules that will       Compass. Detailed instruction on
 separate you from many who misuse       how to mark Elliott wave targets on
 Elliott today. 42 min. $129             charts. Includes the Precision Ratio
                                         Compass. 47 min. $249
 Volume 3. Characteristics of
 Impulse Waves. How you can              Volume 8. Real-Time Investing.
 identify five-wave structures at all    The Wave Principle can signal you
 degrees of trend — from decades to      when risk is low and help you decide
 minutes in duration — as they           how to place a stop-loss at the most
 unfold in real time. 53 min. $129       logical point. 90 min. $129

 Volume 4. Characteristics of            Volume 9. Trading Options
 Corrective Waves. The easy way to       Successfully. How to use one tactic
 identify the two major families of      to master most of the variables at
 corrections, and when to expect         once, and Robert Prechter's three
 explosive price action after            "MUSTS" for success in options. 71
 correction. 75 min. $129                min. $129

 Volume 5. Rules, Guidelines, and        Volume 10. Questions and Answers
 Wave Personalities. You'll learn how    with Bob Prechter and Dave
 the "personalities" of each type of     Allman. A compilation of the most
 wave can make pattern recognition       interesting questions and informative
 crystal clear. 79 min. $129             answers on a variety of topics. 85
                                         min. $129


www.elliottwave.com/wave/DVDbasics
